labs.md, before:

List of Radiocarbon Labs
-------

Maintainted by Evan James Gowan

Note, this is a very incomplete list. Feel free to send corrections via the Issues tab.

-------

Lab name|Country|Lab ID    |conventional or AMS|fractionation correction|other notes|reference
:-------|:------|:--------:|:------------------|:---------------------|:----------|:---------
University of Arizona|United States|A|conventional|||
NSF-Arizona AMS Laboratory|United States|AA|AMS|yes||DonahueEtal1997
University of Aarhus|Denmark|AAR|AMS|yes||AndersonEtal1989
Australian National University|Australia|ANU|conventional|yes, at least from ANU III||PolachEtal1969
University of Bern|Switzerland|B|conventional|no|in some later measurements, they included an additional error term to account for a lack of fractionation correction|GfellerEtal1961,OeschgerEtal1970
Beta Analytic|United States|Beta|conventional|Beta started normalizing after Beta-70783||Beta2022,KellyEtal2022
Beta Analytic|United States|Beta|AMS|Beta started normalizing after Beta-70783|Beta started doing AMS dating in 1983, but did not change their lab code so it is not known which samples are conventional or AMS|Beta2022,KellyEtal2022
British Museum, London|United Kingdom|BM|conventional|no|As a result of the lack of fractionation correction, they included a 80 year error to account for this, plus a 100 year error for the de Vries effect|BarkerMackey1959
CSIRO Division of Soils Radiocarbon Laboratory|Australia|CS|conventional|yes||BowmanHarvey1983
CSIRO|Australia|CSC|AMS|yes||SieEtal1994
Gakushuin University|Japan|GaK|conventional|marine shells are not corrected for fractionation|Intercomparison of samples from different labs show that GaK dates are likely unreliable|KigoshiEtal1973,Blake1980,Blakeslee1994
Groningen|Netherlands|GrN|conventional|correction is applied to terrestrial material if dC13 is measured, but not to marine carbonates (sea shells) and freshwater carbonates||VogelWaterbolk1972
Geological Survey of Canada|Canada|GSC|conventional|In GSC I, they state no correction for fractionation is made. In GSC VIII, they started to measure d13C for samples less than 5000 years, but they did not correct for fractionation in that list. In GSC IX, they began doing corrections for any samples with a d13C measurement. They used -25 permille for terrestrial material and bones (terrestrial and marine), and unconventionally 0 permille for marine shells. In XXVIII, they state no correction is made for freshwater shells.  In GSC XXXV, they state the same, so this should be the correction for all dates published after GSC IX.|GSC dates are unconventionally reported with 2-sigma error ranges. Note that other Geological Survey of Canada dates from labs like Brock and Isotrace may also be reported in this way.|DyckFyles1962,LowdonBlake1970,LowdonEtal1979,McNeely1989,McNeely2006
Geochron Laboratories|United States|GX|conventional|Samples were normalized after 1980, Kelly et al use GX-8633 as the cutoff||KellyEtal2022
Teledyne Isotopes|United States|I|conventional|no||BuckleyValdesPages1981
Illinois State Geological Survey|United States|ISGS|conventional|yes||KellyEtal2022
Copenhagen Carbon-14 Laboratory, National Museum|Denmark|K|conventional|Early reports (Copenhagen IV) state no. However according to Funder (1982), it seems that they did, except that marine shells were unconventionally normalized to 0 permille|In Copenhagen III, they state that 200 +/- 40 should be added to all of the dates due to a change in standards to correct for the Seuss effect. In Copenhagen IV, they state due to not correcting for fractionation, the laboratory rounded all errors that were lower than 100 years to 100 years. This was true up to their last date list (X), but some later reported ages were below that.|Tauber1960,Tauber1960a., Funder, S., 1982. 14C-dating of samples collected during the 1979 expedition to North Greenland. Rapport Grønlands Geologiske Undersøgelse, 110, pp.9-14.
Lamont Geological Observatory (Columbia University)|United States|L|conventional|Fractionation was corrected from 1956|Lamont VI sets a standardized way to correct for fractionation|BroeckerOlson1959
La Jolla, Scripps Institute of Oceanography, University of California|United States|LJ|conventional|Samples were corrected from 1971, any date list after VI should be corrected (LJ-2000 to LJ-2300), those before likely not||HubbsEtal1960,Linick1977
Lund (conventional)|Sweden|Lu|conventional|yes||Håkansson, S., 1974. University of Lund radiocarbon dates VII. Radiocarbon, 16(3), pp.307-330.
Lund (AMS)|Sweden|LuS|AMS|likely||
University of Michigan|United States|M|conventional|||
University of New South Wales|Australia|NSW|conventional|no||Neuhaus1965
Nagoya University Tandem Accelerator|Japan|NUTA|AMS|yes||NakaiEtal1984
Rafter Radiocarbon Laboratory|New Zealand|NZA|AMS|yes||BaisdenEtal2013,GNS2022
Humble Oil|United States|O|conventional|not stated, but likely not based on the fact that their early measurements were likely done without any knowledge of the fractionation effect|Only two date lists came out before Humble Oil was completely purchased by Standard Oil in 1959. The lab appears to have continued operating into the 1960s, but the operating procedures are unknown.|BrannonEtal1957b
ANTARES|Australia|OZA|AMS|yes||FinkEtal2004
ANTARES|Australia|OZC|AMS|yes||FinkEtal2004
ANTARES|Australia|OZD|AMS|yes||FinkEtal2004
ANTARES|Australia|OZL|AMS|yes||FinkEtal2004
University of Pennsylvania|United States|P|conventional|no||Ralph1959
University of Pisa|Italy|Pi|conventional|||
Cambridge University|United Kingdom|Q|conventional|||
Queens College|United States|QC|conventional|no||PardiNewman1980
University of Saskatchewan|Canada|S|conventional|||
Simon Fraser University|Canada|SFU|conventional|If d13C was measured, otherwise no unless otherwise stated||HobsonNelson1984
Socony Mobil|United States|SM|conventional||Some early dates from this lab use the code "MP"|BrayBurke1960
Geological Survey of Sweden|Sweden|St|conventional|yes||Ostlund1959
Sydney University|Australia|SUA|conventional|yes||GillespieEtal1972
Scottish Universities Environmental Research Centre|United Kingdom|SUERC|AMS|yes||XuEtal2004
ANU Radiocarbon Laboratory (SSAMS)|Australia|S-ANU|AMS|yes||FallonEtal2010
Norwegian Insitutue of Technology, Trondheim|Norway|T|conventional|In Trondheim I, no. In Trondheim II, they discuss measuring d13C for fractionation, but it is not clear if they applied it to the dates on this list|In the first date list, they do not include an error for the standard deviation of the half life (30 years)|Nydal1959,Nydal1960
University of Texas at Austin|United States|Tx|conventional|no, unless noted||Valastro, S., Davis, E.M., Varela, A.G. And Lisk, S.V., 1988. University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates XVI. Radiocarbon, 30(2), pp.197-253.
Uppsala University (conventional)|Sweden|U|conventional|yes||Olsson1959
Uppsala University (AMS)|Sweden|Ua|AMS|likely||
Belfast (conventional)|United Kingdom|UB|conventional|yes||Smith, A.G., Pearson, G.W. And Pilcher, J.R., 1973. Belfast radiocarbon dates V. Radiocarbon, 15(1), pp.212-228.
Belfast (AMS)|United Kingdom|UBA|AMS|likely||
University of Georgia|United States|UGa|conventional|Corrected after UGa-5470||KellyEtal2022
Universite du Quebec a Montreal GEOTOP (UQAM)|Canada|UQ|conventional|no||Dubois, J.M.M., Occhietti, S., Pichet, P., Page, P., Jacob, C. And Bigras, P., 1988. Universite du Quebec a Montreal GEOTOP Radiocarbon Dates I. Radiocarbon, 30(3), pp.355-365.
United States Geological Survey|United States|W|conventional|||
University of Waikato|New Zealand|Wk|conventional|yes||HoggEtal1987
University of Waikato|New Zealand|Wk|AMS|yes|They do not distinguish between AMS and conventional dates with a different code|Waikato2022
Yale University|United States|Y|conventional|Fractionation corrections were applied after Yale VI (roughly >Y-741)||StuiverDeevey1961

Commit message:

added ORINS and WAIT and information on Y

labs.md, after:

List of Radiocarbon Labs
-------

Maintainted by Evan James Gowan

Note, this is a very incomplete list. Feel free to send corrections via the Issues tab.

-------

Lab name|Country|Lab ID    |conventional or AMS|fractionation correction|other notes|reference
:-------|:------|:--------:|:------------------|:---------------------|:----------|:---------
University of Arizona|United States|A|conventional|||
NSF-Arizona AMS Laboratory|United States|AA|AMS|yes||DonahueEtal1997
University of Aarhus|Denmark|AAR|AMS|yes||AndersonEtal1989
Australian National University|Australia|ANU|conventional|yes, at least from ANU III||PolachEtal1969
University of Bern|Switzerland|B|conventional|no|in some later measurements, they included an additional error term to account for a lack of fractionation correction|GfellerEtal1961,OeschgerEtal1970
Beta Analytic|United States|Beta|conventional|Beta started normalizing after Beta-70783||Beta2022,KellyEtal2022
Beta Analytic|United States|Beta|AMS|Beta started normalizing after Beta-70783|Beta started doing AMS dating in 1983, but did not change their lab code so it is not known which samples are conventional or AMS|Beta2022,KellyEtal2022
British Museum, London|United Kingdom|BM|conventional|no|As a result of the lack of fractionation correction, they included a 80 year error to account for this, plus a 100 year error for the de Vries effect|BarkerMackey1959
CSIRO Division of Soils Radiocarbon Laboratory|Australia|CS|conventional|yes||BowmanHarvey1983
CSIRO|Australia|CSC|AMS|yes||SieEtal1994
Gakushuin University|Japan|GaK|conventional|marine shells are not corrected for fractionation|Intercomparison of samples from different labs show that GaK dates are likely unreliable|KigoshiEtal1973,Blake1980,Blakeslee1994
Groningen|Netherlands|GrN|conventional|correction is applied to terrestrial material if dC13 is measured, but not to marine carbonates (sea shells) and freshwater carbonates||VogelWaterbolk1972
Geological Survey of Canada|Canada|GSC|conventional|In GSC I, they state no correction for fractionation is made. In GSC VIII, they started to measure d13C for samples less than 5000 years, but they did not correct for fractionation in that list. In GSC IX, they began doing corrections for any samples with a d13C measurement. They used -25 permille for terrestrial material and bones (terrestrial and marine), and unconventionally 0 permille for marine shells. In XXVIII, they state no correction is made for freshwater shells.  In GSC XXXV, they state the same, so this should be the correction for all dates published after GSC IX.|GSC dates are unconventionally reported with 2-sigma error ranges. Note that other Geological Survey of Canada dates from labs like Brock and Isotrace may also be reported in this way.|DyckFyles1962,LowdonBlake1970,LowdonEtal1979,McNeely1989,McNeely2006
Geochron Laboratories|United States|GX|conventional|Samples were normalized after 1980, Kelly et al use GX-8633 as the cutoff||KellyEtal2022
Teledyne Isotopes|United States|I|conventional|no||BuckleyValdesPages1981
Illinois State Geological Survey|United States|ISGS|conventional|yes||KellyEtal2022
Copenhagen Carbon-14 Laboratory, National Museum|Denmark|K|conventional|Early reports (Copenhagen IV) state no. However according to Funder (1982), it seems that they did, except that marine shells were unconventionally normalized to 0 permille|In Copenhagen III, they state that 200 +/- 40 should be added to all of the dates due to a change in standards to correct for the Seuss effect. In Copenhagen IV, they state due to not correcting for fractionation, the laboratory rounded all errors that were lower than 100 years to 100 years. This was true up to their last date list (X), but some later reported ages were below that.|Tauber1960,Tauber1960a., Funder, S., 1982. 14C-dating of samples collected during the 1979 expedition to North Greenland. Rapport Grønlands Geologiske Undersøgelse, 110, pp.9-14.
Lamont Geological Observatory (Columbia University)|United States|L|conventional|Fractionation was corrected from 1956|Lamont VI sets a standardized way to correct for fractionation|BroeckerOlson1959
La Jolla, Scripps Institute of Oceanography, University of California|United States|LJ|conventional|Samples were corrected from 1971, any date list after VI should be corrected (LJ-2000 to LJ-2300), those before likely not||HubbsEtal1960,Linick1977
Lund (conventional)|Sweden|Lu|conventional|yes||Håkansson, S., 1974. University of Lund radiocarbon dates VII. Radiocarbon, 16(3), pp.307-330.
Lund (AMS)|Sweden|LuS|AMS|likely||
University of Michigan|United States|M|conventional|||
University of New South Wales|Australia|NSW|conventional|no||Neuhaus1965
Nagoya University Tandem Accelerator|Japan|NUTA|AMS|yes||NakaiEtal1984
Rafter Radiocarbon Laboratory|New Zealand|NZA|AMS|yes||BaisdenEtal2013,GNS2022
Humble Oil|United States|O|conventional|not stated, but likely not based on the fact that their early measurements were likely done without any knowledge of the fractionation effect|Only two date lists came out before Humble Oil was completely purchased by Standard Oil in 1959. The lab appears to have continued operating into the 1960s, but the operating procedures are unknown.|BrannonEtal1957b
Oak Ridge Institute of Nuclear Studies/ Oak Ridge Associated Universities|United States|ORINS|conventional|not stated, but likely not||NoakesEtal1967
ANTARES|Australia|OZA|AMS|yes||FinkEtal2004
ANTARES|Australia|OZC|AMS|yes||FinkEtal2004
ANTARES|Australia|OZD|AMS|yes||FinkEtal2004
ANTARES|Australia|OZL|AMS|yes||FinkEtal2004
University of Pennsylvania|United States|P|conventional|no||Ralph1959
University of Pisa|Italy|Pi|conventional|||
Cambridge University|United Kingdom|Q|conventional|||
Queens College|United States|QC|conventional|no||PardiNewman1980
University of Saskatchewan|Canada|S|conventional|||
Simon Fraser University|Canada|SFU|conventional|If d13C was measured, otherwise no unless otherwise stated||HobsonNelson1984
Socony Mobil|United States|SM|conventional||Some early dates from this lab use the code "MP"|BrayBurke1960
Geological Survey of Sweden|Sweden|St|conventional|yes||Ostlund1959
Sydney University|Australia|SUA|conventional|yes||GillespieEtal1972
Scottish Universities Environmental Research Centre|United Kingdom|SUERC|AMS|yes||XuEtal2004
ANU Radiocarbon Laboratory (SSAMS)|Australia|S-ANU|AMS|yes||FallonEtal2010
Norwegian Insitutue of Technology, Trondheim|Norway|T|conventional|In Trondheim I, no. In Trondheim II, they discuss measuring d13C for fractionation, but it is not clear if they applied it to the dates on this list|In the first date list, they do not include an error for the standard deviation of the half life (30 years)|Nydal1959,Nydal1960
University of Texas at Austin|United States|Tx|conventional|no, unless noted||Valastro, S., Davis, E.M., Varela, A.G. And Lisk, S.V., 1988. University of Texas at Austin radiocarbon dates XVI. Radiocarbon, 30(2), pp.197-253.
Uppsala University (conventional)|Sweden|U|conventional|yes||Olsson1959
Uppsala University (AMS)|Sweden|Ua|AMS|likely||
Belfast (conventional)|United Kingdom|UB|conventional|yes||Smith, A.G., Pearson, G.W. And Pilcher, J.R., 1973. Belfast radiocarbon dates V. Radiocarbon, 15(1), pp.212-228.
Belfast (AMS)|United Kingdom|UBA|AMS|likely||
University of Georgia|United States|UGa|conventional|Corrected after UGa-5470||KellyEtal2022
Universite du Quebec a Montreal GEOTOP (UQAM)|Canada|UQ|conventional|no||Dubois, J.M.M., Occhietti, S., Pichet, P., Page, P., Jacob, C. And Bigras, P., 1988. Universite du Quebec a Montreal GEOTOP Radiocarbon Dates I. Radiocarbon, 30(3), pp.355-365.
United States Geological Survey|United States|W|conventional|||
Western Australia Institute of Technology|Australia|WAIT|conventional||There is no information on the laboratory practices of this lab, I am assuming it is conventional since the dates come from the 1980s
University of Waikato|New Zealand|Wk|conventional|yes||HoggEtal1987
University of Waikato|New Zealand|Wk|AMS|yes|They do not distinguish between AMS and conventional dates with a different code|Waikato2022
Yale University|United States|Y|conventional|Fractionation corrections were applied after Yale VI (roughly >Y-741)||StuiverDeevey1961
